+++
title = "From Excel to TSV to Rust"
date = 2020-01-22
+++

I'm trying to build a simple card game, but that's not even the horrifying part
of this story. The horrifying part is that I'm keeping my data in Microsoft
Excel.

It's perfect! It flattens the data into something that can be more easily
expressed as an object, and the relationships between cards are easy to model.
Should one card always be 20% more expensive than another, or half as expensive?
Easy solution: use an Excel formula. Spreadsheets were built for this. But
reading a spreadsheet from a game is madness.

Initially I exported the spreadsheet as Tab-separated Values (TSV), a simple
format that obeys CSV rules and Excel can export natively. This happily reduced
the problem to reading TSV, but as I wrote a Rust parser for reading that TSV
there was enough unwraps and error handling occurring that I decided it would be
easier to move all this error-prone part further back in my asset pipeline.

So I decided to turn TSV directly into a `.rs` file. This is the madness, the
horrifying part which is why someone ought to take my keyboard away.

My go-to for hacky things is Ruby, so I wrote a small Ruby script which can read
the TSV and then echo it back out using an ERB template to turn it into Rust
code.

    # tsv2rs.rb
    #!ruby

    require 'csv'
    require 'erb'

    TSV='ARCOMAGE_CARDS.txt'
    RST='src/cards.rs.erb'
    RS ='src/cards.rs'

    def value_or_default(value, default)
      if value == nil or value.empty?; default; else value; end
    end

    File.new(RS, File::CREAT|File::TRUNC|File::RDWR, 0644)
        .write ERB.new(File.read(RST)).result(binding)

It's very simple, aside from the helper function `value_or_default` it's just
two lines: open a file, then write out the result.

The ERB template is where frightening things happen, where we write code which
writes code. But it's not that scary, actually. I want something static, but
also in a `Vec`, so `lazy_static` showed up. After that it's very simple Rust
constructors.

    use lazy_static::lazy_static;
    use crate::card::*;

    lazy_static! {
      pub static ref CARDS: Vec<Card> = vec![<%
      first = true
      CSV.foreach(TSV, col_sep: "\t") do |row|
        # skips header rows, assumes your first column is always a number
        next unless row.first.match? /^[0-9]+$/
      %>
      <% unless first %>,<% end %>
      <% first = false %>
      Card {
        atlas_row: <%= row[0] %>,
        atlas_col: <%= row[1] %>,
        category: Category::<%= row[2].capitalize %>,
        card_name: "<%= row[3] %>".to_owned(),
        cost: PlayCost {
          bricks: <%= value_or_default row[4], 0 %>,
          ...
        }
        ...
      }
      <% end %>
      ];
    }

There's some complexity in keeping track of the first time the loop has been
iterated over so a comma can be printed between items, but otherwise it's plain
ERB that shouldn't look terribly unfamiliar to anyone who's used Ruby on Rails
before. Or Jinja with Python.

I highly suggest running `cargo fmt` afterward, because ERB isn't well known for
cleaning up whitespace effectively.

Following this, it was time to glue everything together. For this I found that
PowerShell worked marvelously. I found a [StackOverflow][so0] answer which
provided the basics, then [Microsoft documentation][msft0] had a script using
Excel itself to output TSV, then run my Ruby script.

    # xlsx2tsv2rs.ps1
    $ExcelFile = Join-Path $(Get-Location) ARCOMAGE_CARDS.xlsx
    $TsvFile = Join-Path $(Get-Location) ARCOMAGE_CARDS.tsv
    $TsvFmtCode = -4158
    $Excel = New-Object -Com Excel.Application
    $Excel.DisplayAlerts=$False
    $WorkBook = $Excel.Workbooks.Open($ExcelFile)
    $WorkBook.SaveAs($TsvFile, $TsvFmtCode)
    $Excel.quit()
    ruby tsv2rs.rb

The natural next step for this is to use a `build.rs` file to invoke this
automatically when `cargo build` is run, however, there's a reason why I *don't*
think that's a good idea: it destroys cross-platform compatibility. The way it
is now, I can rebuild my static objects when I'm on a Windows PC which has
PowerShell, Excel, and Ruby. While PowerShell is now cross-platform, the only
other native platform for Excel is Mac. I'm not even sure if PowerShell on Mac
would interface with Excel for Mac the way it has on Windows.

And that's how I learned to convert Excel to Rust.

[so0]: https://stackoverflow.com/a/1858234
[msft0]: https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/office/vba/api/excel.xlfileformat